So far, you've calculated
the transition and emission
probabilities for
the Markov Chain
and the Hidden Markov model.
Given the parts of speech
tag in these probabilities,
you can easily select
the most likely next parts of
speech tag or the
most probable word.
You can do so by looking
up the correct entry in
the respective row of the
transition or emission matrix.
But was if you're
given a sentence,
like why not learn something?
What is the most likely
sequence of parts of
speech tags given the
sentence in your model?
The sequence can be computed
using the Viterbi algorithm.
You're about to see lots of
formulas which are all based on
matrices representing
our Hidden Markov model,
but the Viterbi algorithm is
actually a graph algorithm.
Picturing the problem we want to
solve on the graph will make it
much easier for us to understand
the formulas and the algorithm.
Let's look at this toy model and
the sentence, I love to learn.
With a leading start token,
you want to find the sequence of
hidden states or parts of
speech tags that have
the highest probability
for this sequence.
Be aware that the word love
can be emitted by
both the noun states,
NN and the verb states, NN.
You starting from the
initial states by
selecting the next most
probable hidden states which
here is the O state as the word I
cannot be emitted from
any other states
in this toy model.
This involves the transition
probabilities shown in green with
0.3 and the emission
probability in orange with 0.5.
The joint probability
for observing the word
I and with a transition
through the O state is 0.15,
which you can calculate by
multiplying the
transition probability,
0.3 and the emission
probability of 0.5.
Now, there are two
possibilities of
having observed the word love.
It is either by traversing
through the hidden states,
NN or the hidden states, VB.
The transition
probabilities are the
same for going to either
of the two hidden states.
The emission probability for
the word love is higher
from the VB states,
so you should choose
that path with
a combined probability of 0.25.
Next, you return to the
O state as there is
no other hidden states with
a non-zero emission
probability for the word to.
The combined probability
here is 0.08.
At last, return to the VB states
again as there is no other
option for this toy model.
This step has a combined
probability of 0.1.
The total probability
is the product of
all the probabilities for the
single steps you've chosen,
which is 0.0003 here.
The Viterbi algorithm actually
computes several such paths at
the same time in order to find
the most likely sequence
of hidden states.
It uses the matrix representation
of the Hidden Markov model.
The algorithm can be split into
three main steps: the
initialization step,
the forward pass, and
the backward pass.
Given your transition and
emission probabilities,
you first populates and then use
the auxiliary matrices C and D.
The matrix C holds
the intermediate optimal
probabilities and matrix D,
the indices of the
visited states.
As you're traversing
the model graph to find
the most likely
sequence of parts of
speech tags for the
given sequence of words,
W_1 all the way to W_K.
These two matrices have n rows,
where n is the number of parts of
speech tags or hidden
states in our model,
and k columns, where k
is the number of words
in the given sequence.